Spec: Add a new virtual-customizable `home` attribute (#30917)
LLNL/spack: lib/spack/docs/packaging_guide.rst

Spack will fail with a constraint violation, because the version of
MPICH requested is too low for the ``mpi`` requirement in ``foo``.

.. _package-attributes:

------------------

> Package attributes

Reviewer: Technically these are spec attributes (`self.spec.foo`), not package attributes (`self.spec.package.foo`)

Author: I suppose it's neither since their attributes on the `SpecBuildInterface`.  I could just change the section header to "Custom attributes", would that be sufficient?

------------------

Packages can provide custom implementations of four attributes used
by dependents to interrogate various aspects of what it provides:

+-------------+---------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| Attribute   | Purpose                                     | Default                  |
+=============+=============================================+==========================+
| ``root``    | The installation directory for the package  | ``spec.prefix``          |
|             |                                             |                          |
+-------------+---------------------------------------------+--------------------------+

> | ``command`` | An executable command for the package       | ``spec.name`` in         |

Reviewer: Can't believe we never documented any of these before lol

|             |                                             | ``spec.prefix.bin``      |
+-------------+---------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| ``headers`` | A list of headers provided by the package   | All headers in           |
|             |                                             | ``spec.prefix.include``  |
+-------------+---------------------------------------------+--------------------------+
| ``libs``    | A list of libraries provided by the package | ``lib{spec.name}`` in    |

> |             |                                             | ``spec.prefix``          |

Reviewer: Not sure how to convey that this could be `spec.prefix.lib` or `spec.prefix.lib64`, or something else recursively

Author: I'll add some wording accordingly.

Spack will fail with a constraint violation, because the version of
MPICH requested is too low for the ``mpi`` requirement in ``foo``.

.. _custom-attributes:

------------------
Custom attributes
------------------

> Often packages will need to provide attributes for dependents to query
> various details about what it provides.  While any number of custom defined

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Often, a package will need to provide attributes for dependents to query
details about what it provides.  While any number of custom defined
```

> attributes can be implemented by a pacakage, the specific four attributes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
attributes can be implemented by a package, the four specific attributes
```

described below are always available on every package with default
implementations and the ability to customize with alternate implementations
in the case of virtual packages provided:

=========== =========================================== =====================
Attribute   Purpose                                     Default
=========== =========================================== =====================
``root``    The installation directory for the package  ``spec.prefix``
``command`` An executable command for the package       | ``spec.name`` in

>                                                         | ``spec.prefix.bin``

Reviewer 3: Why a single command, rather than a list? Also, need to check the code blow, but is `spec.command` supposed to be a Boolean?

Reviewer 3: Ok, I see this is documenting the already existing `command` property. The default of:
```python
spec.name in spec.prefix.bin
```
is rather confusing, since the return type of that expression is a Boolean.

Author: Re-worderd to:

"`spec.name` found in `spec.prefix.bin`"

``headers`` A list of headers provided by the package   | All headers
                                                          searched
                                                        | recursively in
                                                          ``spec.prefix``
``libs``    A list of libraries provided by the package | ``lib{spec.name}``
                                                          searched
                                                        | recursively in
                                                          ``lib``, ``lib64``,
                                                        | then the rest of

>                                                           of ``spec.prefix``

Reviewer 2: why not write the `headers` and `libs` defaults in terms of `spec.root`, so that if you change the root for a virtual, you automatically get appropriately implemented `headers` and `libs` attributes too?  I think this behavior will be more common, and you could still override both `foo_root` and `foo_headers` if you need to, but more likely you'll only need to override `foo_root`.

Author: This got me stuck for quite a while.  I agree it should be implemented this way but there's something about the `libs` property that completely breaks down when you try to call another custom property inside it's implementation (no problem with the `headers` property).  The problem is unrelated to this change as I can reproduce it in current `develop` so I'll leave it as a TODO afterwards.

Author: Okay, i was able to make this work by putting a default `home` property in the base package class similar to `prefix`

The implementation used is the first one found from:

#. Specialized virtual: ``Package.virtualpackagename_attributename``
#. Generic package: ``Package.attributename``
#. Default

The use of customized attributes is demonstrated in the next example.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Example: Customized attributes for virtual packages
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Consider a package ``foo`` that can optionally provide two virtual
packages ``bar`` and ``baz``.  When both are enabled the installation tree
appears as follows:

.. code-block:: console

   include/foo.h
   include/bar/bar.h
   lib64/libFoo.so
   lib64/libFooBar.so
   baz/include/baz/baz.h
   baz/lib/libFooBaz.so

The install tree shows that ``foo`` is providing the header ``include/foo.h``
and library ``lib64/libFoo.so`` in it's install prefix.  The virtual
package ``bar`` is providing ``include/bar/bar.h`` and library
``lib64/libFooBar.so``, also in ``foo``'s install prefix.  The ``baz``
package, however, is provided in the ``baz`` subdirectory of ``foo``'s
prefix with the ``include/baz/baz.h`` header and ``lib/libFooBaz.so``

> library.  Such a package could implement the optional attributes as

Reviewer 3: Can we make the example be based on a real use case (which I am sure exists)? By just reading the docs I don't understand which use case this PR covers (given that `mpi_libs` etc. already exist as properties).

Author: There's two use cases in particular but they can't really be implemented until the feature is available so having the docs show an actual package implementing it is a chicken/egg problem.  The two use cases that motivated the pr (although there can certainly be others) are:

1. A package providing multiple components in sub-directories of it's install prefix making each component available as a virtual package.
2. Using dummy packages for complex scenarios that virtuals don't allow for (think virtuals providing virtuals).

1 is the easiest to understand and why I used it for the example.  It would be particularly useful for simplifying the intel and oneapi packages but is also useful for upcoming changes to paraview, vtk, and vtkm packages (vtk provides vtkm, and paraview provides vtk and vtkm).

2 is the more immediate use case and is being used to solve a structural issue with mesa, glx, and osmesa.  Mesa provides both glx and osmesa in the same build, and both of those have valid implementations of opengl.  Currently though there's no way to have mesa respond appropriately for `spec['gl'].libs` since there's no way of knowing *which* of the two `gl` implementations is being queried.  So I've created dummy `osmesa` and `glx` packages to allow the following:
```python
class Mesa(MesonPackage):
   provides('libosmesa', when='+osmesa')
   provides('libglx', when='+glx')

class Osmesa(BundlePackage):
    depends_on('libosmesa')
    provides('gl')

    @property
    def home(self):
        return self.spec['libosmesa'].prefix

    @property
    def headers(self):
        return self.spec['libosmesa'].headers

    @property
    def libs(self):
        return self.spec['libosmesa'].libs

    @property
    def gl_headers(self):
        return find_headers('GL/gl.h', root=self.home.include, recursive=False)

class Glx(BundlePackage):
    depends_on('libglx')
    provides('gl')

    @property
    def home(self):
        return self.spec['libglx'].prefix

    @property
    def headers(self):
        return self.spec['libglx'].headers

    @property
    def libs(self):
        return self.spec['libglx'].libs

    @property
    def gl_headers(self):
        return find_headers('GL/gl.h', root=self.home.include, recursive=False)
```

This effectively lets `mesa` provide two different `gl` virtual packages in the same build, each providing different `libs`

Author: Regarding the second case, `spec['gl'].headers` and `.libs` work as is but `.prefix` will give the install path of the dummy pacakge which is not particularly helpful.  `.home` will give the correct install prefix delegated to `mesa` even though `gl` is provided by `osmesa` or `glx`.

Spack packages should list supported versions with the newest first.

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
Using ``root`` vs ``prefix``
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``root`` and ``prefix`` are both attributes that can be queried on a
package's dependencies, often when passing configure arguments pointing to the
location of a dependency.  The difference is that while ``prefix`` is the
location on disk where a concrete package resides, ``root`` is the `logical`
location that a package resides, which may be different than ``prefix`` in
the case of virtual packages or other special circumstances.  For most use
cases inside a package dependency paths should be accessed via

> ``self.spec['foo'].root`` instead of ``self.spec['foo'].prefix``.

Reviewer 3: Can you explain this, or point to relevant discussion that I might have missed? I think everything we have so far is implemented in terms of `spec.prefix`, so if `spec.root` is preferred this might be a maintenance issue.

Author: I'll drop the language around the new attribute being preferential.  For most use cases it only matters when directly querying a virtual dependency and even then only in the packages it actually gets used for. That can certainly be confusing when people often look to existing packages to see what they should do.
